development oppertunities (#205)
geoserver/geoserver.github.io: _posts/2024-07-22-developer-update.md

---
author: Jody Garnett
layout: post
title: GeoServer 2024 Q3 Developer Update
date: 2024-07-22
categories:
- Behind The Scenes
---

This is a follow up to [2024 roadmap]({% post_url 2024-01-03-roadmap %}) post outlining development opportunities.

> First of all thanks to developers and organisations that have responded with offers of in-kind contributions. We have not had enough capacity to organize in-kind contributions or fundraising and this blog post is an attempt to remedy.

Reviewer: No apologies needed. Remember it's an open source project, what's already there is free, anything else, "contributions welcomed".

```suggestion
First of all thanks to developers and organisations that have responded with offers of in-kind contributions! This blog post is assessing the current situation and tries to pave a way forward to complete the Java 17/Jakarta EE/Spring 6 upgrades.
```

Author: yeah good advice, I take things too personally.

## Spring Framework 6 Tasks

The key challenge we are building towards is a spring-framework 6 update, ideally by the end of 2024 when the version we use now reaches end-of-life.

The tasks below are steps towards this goal.

### Wicket 9 upgrade

Interested Parties:

* Brad has been doing amazing work with the Wicket 9 upgrade and is in need of assistance.
* GeoCat has offered to do manual A/B testing when PR is ready for testing

Activity:

* [[GEOS-11275]](https://osgeo-org.atlassian.net/browse/GEOS-11275) Wicket 9 upgrade
* [geoserver#7154](https://github.com/geoserver/geoserver/pull/7154)

### Spring Security 5.8 update

Spring Security 5.8 provides a safe stepping stone ahead of the complete spring-framework 6 upgrade and is an activity that can be worked on immediately. 

Interested parties:
- Andreas (ITS Digital Solutions GmbH) offered to work on this activity in during the initial January call out, and has indicated they are now ready to start.

> - GeoSolutions has indicated they are in position to work on this activity if financing is available

Author: @aaime you did not provide anything specific GeoSolutions was in position to work on (if financing is available). Is this good enough or would you like to add to more of the items below.

Reviewer: Given someone is doing this work already, I'd remove the GeoSolutions line, it's unnecessary, best to use the available manpower on other tasks instead.

### Spring Security Core implementation of OAuth2 / OIDC

The spring-security-oauth client has reached end-of-life and a GeoServer OAuth2 support must be rewritten or migrated as a result.

There are two paths to migrate to spring-security-core implementation:

* Option: Migrate the existing community module implementations to spring-security-core in place; with as little loss of functionality as possible. This has the advantage of using existing test coverage to maintain a consistent set of functionality.

* Option: Setup a community module alongside the existing implementation with the goal of making a full supported etension. This approach has the advantages of allowing organisations the ability to do A/B testing as both the old and new implementation would be available alongside each other.

Security integrations often require infrastructure to develop and test against, which the core GeoServer team does not have access to for automated tests. While the initial priority will be basic OAuth2 and OIDC parties interested in maintaining support for Google, Azure, GeoNode, etc... are welcome to participate.

Interested Parties:

> - Andreas (ITS Digital Solutions GmbH) offered to work on this activity and has indicated they are now ready to start

Reviewer: Did he specifically say anything about the OIDC community module though? Spring security upgrade is one thing, removing the usage of the external, unmaintained OIDC library is something different.
I'd have a statement like "Geosolutions and GeoCat are in a position to do this work..." without dragging other parties in (unless they want to!).

Author: He did in an email this week:

> I am now starting to work on:
>  
> GEOS-11271 : Upgrade spring-security to 5.8
> GEOS-11272 : spring-security-oauth replacement, with spring-security 5.8
>  
> As far as I know no activities have taken place in this area so far. Otherwise please let me know.

- GeoCat is in position to do this work after performing the same upgrade for the GeoNetwork codebase. GeoCat wishes to have an OIDC plugin brought up to full extension status, if financing is available.

Activity: not started

* [[GEOS-11272]](https://osgeo-org.atlassian.net/browse/GEOS-11272) spring-security-oauth replacement, with spring-security 5.8

### ImageN / JAI Replacement

The image processing library used by GeoServer has been donated to the open source community under the name [ImageN](https://projects.eclipse.org/projects/technology.imagen).

We would like to see organisations that depend on GeoServer for earth observation and imagery to step forward with funding for this activity.

Interested Parties: 

* Jody (GeoCat) is available to support this activity, or take lead if funding is available.
* Andrea (GeoSolutions) has had a deep dive into the implications for the JAI-EXT project outlining a roadmap for project integration

Activities:

> * The immediate goal is to add test cases to this codebase and make a version 1.0 release

Reviewer: Please check my plan again. jai-ext is coming with plenty of test cases, and it's going to replace the bulk of operators: there is no point adding tests for those, if we are going to throw them away anyways.
We need to add tests on the parts that JAI-EXT is not going to replace, that's all (the very core infrastructure).

Author: that would make me very happy

## Other Development activities

In addition to the key roadmap activities a few other development ideas have been shared:

* OGCAPI Web Services: Gabe (camptocamp) and Jody (GeoCat) are interested in setting up a code sprint for September on this activity.
  

>   If there is enough interest we would like to arrange a cost-recovery code sprint model as was done for last years API change. Ideally we would like to see a mix of developers, and module lead Andrea (GeoSolutions), attend if sufficient funding is available.

Reviewer: There is basically zero chance I'll be able to attend any sprint in September, first week I'm in vacation, second week I'm at FOSS4G-NA, the other two weeks I really need to follow up with customer work...

Also, if you intend to go with a rewrite of the modules, a discussion on list would be needed, with an eventual result of having two competing ogcapi sets of modules.

Author: I will remove this rather than communicate on gabe's behalf; while I would like to work on OGCAPI I need a plan that is agreed to first, or budget to make a plan.

* S57 / S100: Jody (GeoCat) asked on the user list for any parties interested in the S57 and S100 marine formats. Such an activity may result in direct GeoTools implementation, or revitalization of the OGR datastore as appropriate.

We also have a few requests for assistance:

* Refactor inline JavaScript in the OGC API modules
  

>   In order to enable a more restricted ``Content-Security-Policy`` Steve Ikeoka has carefully removed all inline JavaScript from the OGCAPI community modules. Before pull-request [geoserver#7587](https://github.com/geoserver/geoserver/pull/7587) can be merged we need a volunteer to do A/B testing on each page, to double check we have not lost anything.

Reviewer: Both OGC API and these can be roadmap, but are also off-topic compared to the lack of funding for Jakarta EE... aren't you going to just confuse the reader?

Author: Yeah I can remove this section, short and sweet.
